feat: adding new page for alternative and custom serialization formats (#3186)
Kotlin/kotlinx.serialization: docs-website/topics/serialization-custom-formats.md

> [//]: # (title: Custom serialization formats)

Reviewer: A meta description for the SEO gods?

Author: sounds like a good idea; let's add: 

`[//]: # (description: Learn how to create custom formats for Kotlin serialization, including encoders, decoders, sequential decoding, and support for format-specific types.)`

<primary-label ref="experimental-general"/>

> JSON is currently the only stable format in Kotlin serialization.

Reviewer: This reads very much final :) and "other experimental binary formats" at the end of the intro implies previous experimental binary formats that I don't see mentioned.

To smooth out the intro, I'd rearrange it slightly:
* JSON is the only stable format but there is also experimental support for CBOR and ProtoBuf.
* When none of these work, you can use `Properties` or implement a custom format.

Reviewer 2: It may also be worthwhile to refer to (or give) a bit of explanation of what "experimental" means:
 - Some future changes may have small changes in default serialization
 - There may be some limits to the implementation or mapping between the format and underlying Kotlin structure.
 - The code itself is still production quality

Author: Thank you — all good points
Let's summarize the comments for the intro here 🤔 

So we could start with this (regarding the sentence reading final 😄 — I believe it's finalish~ so not necessarily an issue, but I see what you mean) we can move these ideas together to provide the "only supported stable format vs experimenta"l provides this contrast (also adding properties here) :

> JSON is currently the only stable format in Kotlin serialization. Kotlin serialization also provides experimental support for the [CBOR](serialization-cbor.md) and [ProtoBuf](serialization-protobuf.md) binary formats, as well as the [`Properties`](https://kotlinlang.org/api/kotlinx.serialization/kotlinx-serialization-properties/kotlinx.serialization.properties/-properties/) format for representing classes as flat maps with `String` keys.

Then I think we should follow with @pdvrieze suggestion:

> These experimental format implementations are production-quality, but future releases may introduce changes to their default serialization behavior. Each format may also have limitations in how it represents Kotlin types.

and finally to implement @zamulla suggestion about other "custom formats"

> If none of these formats fit your use case, you can [create a custom format](#create-custom-formats) to control how values and structures are encoded and decoded.

So together:

> JSON is currently the only stable format in Kotlin serialization. Kotlin serialization also provides experimental support for the [CBOR](serialization-cbor.md) and [ProtoBuf](serialization-protobuf.md) binary formats, as well as the [`Properties`](#properties) format for representing classes as flat maps with `String` keys.
>
> These experimental format implementations are production-quality, but future releases may introduce changes to their default serialization behavior. They may also have format-specific limitations on how they represent Kotlin types.
>
> If none of these formats fit your use case, you can [create a custom format](#create-custom-formats) to control how values and structures are encoded and decoded.

Reviewer: LGTM 👍 

For `Properties`, I still feel like the use case could be clearer — what is the virtue of representing classes as flat maps with `String` keys, in which circumstances does it make my life easier? If it's its own format, why is it described here, on the custom formats page. Can we contextualize it somehow?

My guess is that `Properties` is useful when I don't want to get into custom encoders and decoders, or figure out how to fit my class into a JSON, I just want it serialized yesterday. Is that correct?

Author: Hmm 🤔 We should probably move it to a separate page as well. It'd be a really short page, but that would be the cleanest option from an information architecture perspective.

I don't think `Properties` is simpler than serializing a class to JSON; it serves a different use case.

> Kotlin serialization also provides experimental support for serializing values to flat maps with the [`Properties`](https://kotlinlang.org/api/kotlinx.serialization/kotlinx-serialization-properties/kotlinx.serialization.properties/-properties/) class and [creating custom formats](#create-custom-formats).

Reviewer: `Properties` and creating custom formats seem like alternatives, but that relationship is not clarified, I'd like to understand the use cases before I move on to reading dedicated sections. Intuitively using `Properties` solves simpler problems when a full custom format is an overkill, but maybe there are some example use cases or something to steer me in a direction.

Author: good point I posted a suggestion to address this [above](https://github.com/Kotlin/kotlinx.serialization/pull/3186#discussion_r3672893793). 🤔

You can use these options when JSON isn't the right fit for your use case.

For other experimental binary formats, see [CBOR format](serialization-cbor.md) and [ProtoBuf format](serialization-protobuf.md).

> ## Properties

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## `Properties`
```
Maybe even qualify it as "`Properties` format".

Author: I think it's fine without monospace here but the format is a good idea (it can be correct either way, but in a separate page it doesn't matter)

Kotlin serialization can serialize a class into a flat map with `String` keys using

> the [`Properties`](https://kotlinlang.org/api/kotlinx.serialization/kotlinx-serialization-properties/kotlinx.serialization.properties/-properties/) format implementation.

Reviewer: Continuing from the above comment, I'm glad Kotlin serialization can do that, but I'm not exactly sure how it relates to custom formats. Further we call `Properties` a format, but is it custom?

In the end I'm just looking for the use case to be presented first and implementation second.

Author: yea, I agree 🤔 we could introduce the connection in the sense that you don't need to create a custom format for it since it's available already

wdyt about:

> If you need to serialize a class into a flat map with `String` keys, you can use the [`Properties`](https://kotlinlang.org/api/kotlinx.serialization/kotlinx-serialization-properties/kotlinx.serialization.properties/-properties/) format.
The `kotlinx-serialization-properties` library provides this format, so you don't need to implement it yourself.

To use the `Properties` format in your project, add the properties serialization library dependency to your build file:

<tabs>

<tab id="gradle-properties" title="Gradle">

```kotlin
// build.gradle(.kts)

dependencies {
    implementation("org.jetbrains.kotlinx:kotlinx-serialization-properties:%serializationVersion%")
}
```

</tab>

<tab id="maven-properties" title="Maven">

```xml
<!-- pom.xml -->

<dependencies>
    <dependency>
        <groupId>org.jetbrains.kotlinx</groupId>
        <artifactId>kotlinx-serialization-properties</artifactId>
        <version>%serializationVersion%</version>
    </dependency>
</dependencies>
```

</tab>
</tabs>

> Here's an example that encodes a class into a flat map with dot-separated keys for nested properties:

Reviewer: I'm missing the "decodes" part. I understand (hopefully correctly) that the beauty of it is that I don't really need to decode a map, it's already a map, but mentioning this may ease the dreaded cognitive load.

Author: I think we can add it to the example, good idea (it's a pretty small addition)

(small addition to the leadup text)

Here's an example that encodes a class into a flat map with dot-separated keys for nested properties _and decodes the map back into an object_:

```
/* the previous part is unchanged */
    val decodedData = Properties.decodeFromMap<Project>(map)
    println(decodedData.name)
    // kotlinx.serialization
    println(decodedData.owner.name)
    // kotlin
```

```kotlin
// Imports declarations from the serialization library
import kotlinx.serialization.*

> import kotlinx.serialization.properties.Properties

Reviewer: The wildcard below also imports this, right?

Author: true 😄 — nice spot: I also noticed it while adding the decoding part, so it's removed

import kotlinx.serialization.properties.*

@Serializable
class Project(val name: String, val owner: User)

@Serializable
class User(val name: String)

@OptIn(ExperimentalSerializationApi::class)
fun main() {
    val data = Project("kotlinx.serialization", User("kotlin"))
    // Encodes the object into a flat map
    val map = Properties.encodeToMap(data)

    // Iterates through the map and prints the key-value pairs
    map.forEach { (k, v) -> println("$k = $v") }
    // name = kotlinx.serialization
    // owner.name = kotlin
}
```

## Create custom formats

> To create a custom format in Kotlin serialization,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To create a custom format for Kotlin serialization,
```
Or "using"?

Author: "for" works 💯

implement the [`Encoder`](https://kotlinlang.org/api/kotlinx.serialization/kotlinx-serialization-core/kotlinx.serialization.encoding/-encoder/) and [`Decoder`](https://kotlinlang.org/api/kotlinx.serialization/kotlinx-serialization-core/kotlinx.serialization.encoding/-decoder/) interfaces.

> Serializers use these implementations to encode and decode values.

Reviewer: Feels more like the end of the previous paragraph.

> For structured values, such as classes and collections, serializers call the [`beginStructure()`](https://kotlinlang.org/api/kotlinx.serialization/kotlinx-serialization-core/kotlinx.serialization.encoding/-encoder/begin-structure.html) function.

Reviewer: "For structured values" leaves me waiting for the other case, but there's no mention of "unstructured" values. Is this not a use case at all? Then I'd reframe this somewhat, like "For classes and collections, which are structured values, serializers call..."

Author: hmm 🤔 here this paragraph builds on the previous one. 

I believe we could make the connection clearer with: 

> Serializers call the [`beginStructure()`](https://kotlinlang.org/api/kotlinx.serialization/kotlinx-serialization-core/kotlinx.serialization.encoding/-encoder/begin-structure.html) function on these implementations when encoding or decoding structured values, such as classes and collections.

These classes implement the `Encoder`, `Decoder`, `CompositeEncoder`, and `CompositeDecoder` interfaces, so you can use the same class to handle primitive values and structured values in simple formats.

The `AbstractEncoder` class provides default implementations for most of the encode functions, such as [`encodeString()`](https://kotlinlang.org/api/kotlinx.serialization/kotlinx-serialization-core/kotlinx.serialization.encoding/-abstract-encoder/encode-string.html),
which delegate to the [`encodeValue(value: Any)`](https://kotlinlang.org/api/kotlinx.serialization/kotlinx-serialization-core/kotlinx.serialization.encoding/-abstract-encoder/encode-value.html) function.
This means that by overriding the `encodeValue()` function, you can create a basic, functional custom format with minimal effort.

The following sections use these APIs to create a custom format that encodes values into a list, decodes values from that list, and then adds sequential decoding, collection support, and null support.

### Create a basic encoder

To build a custom `Encoder` in Kotlin serialization, you can extend the `AbstractEncoder` class.

> This allows you to control how each value is serialized during the encoding process.

Reviewer: Here and for the mention of `AbstractDecoder` in the next section I would add the benefit we're talking about in the intro: there are many ways you can control serialization, but extending abstract classes allows you to control while not having to rewrite the available default implementations of stuff.

Author: good idea 👍 
we could add it like: 

> This allows you to override the default implementations instead of implementing the `Encoder` and `CompositeEncoder` interfaces from scratch.

and a parallel sentence for decoders ofc

To create a basic encoder:

1. Create a class that extends `AbstractEncoder` to define custom serialization logic:

    ```kotlin
    @ExperimentalSerializationApi
    class ListEncoder : AbstractEncoder() {
        val list = mutableListOf<Any>()
    
        override val serializersModule: SerializersModule = EmptySerializersModule()
    }
    ```

> 2. Override `encodeValue()` to define how the encoder handles each value.

Reviewer: The sample doesn't clearly show that `encodeValue()` is a member of the `ListEncoder` class. We can either mention it in the text, or add the line with the `ListEncoder` declaration to the sample, or both.

Author: added it 👍

    ```kotlin
        override fun encodeValue(value: Any) {
            list.add(value)
        }
    ```

3. Create a function that uses the encoder to serialize a value:

    ```kotlin
    @ExperimentalSerializationApi
    fun <T> encodeToList(serializer: SerializationStrategy<T>, value: T): List<Any> {
        val encoder = ListEncoder()
        encoder.encodeSerializableValue(serializer, value)
        return encoder.list
    }
    ```

4. Add an inline overload that uses `serializer()` with a reified type parameter, so callers don't need to pass the serializer explicitly:

    ```kotlin
    @ExperimentalSerializationApi
    inline fun <reified T> encodeToList(value: T) = encodeToList(serializer(), value)
    ```

> Since encoders are usually used by other parts of an application,
> propagate the `@ExperimentalSerializationApi` annotation instead of opting in only inside individual functions.
>
{style="note"}

Here's a minimal example that encodes the primitive values from an object graph into a flat list in serialization order:

```kotlin

> // Imports declarations from the serialization library

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

import kotlinx.serialization.*
import kotlinx.serialization.descriptors.*
import kotlinx.serialization.encoding.*
import kotlinx.serialization.modules.*

// Creates a custom encoder that stores serialized values in a list
@ExperimentalSerializationApi
class ListEncoder : AbstractEncoder() {
    val list = mutableListOf<Any>()

    override val serializersModule: SerializersModule = EmptySerializersModule()

    // Stores each encoded value
    override fun encodeValue(value: Any) {
        list.add(value)
    }
}

// Encodes a value and returns the collected values as a list
@ExperimentalSerializationApi
fun <T> encodeToList(serializer: SerializationStrategy<T>, value: T): List<Any> {
    val encoder = ListEncoder()
    encoder.encodeSerializableValue(serializer, value)
    return encoder.list
}

> // Provides a type-safe inline overload for convenience

Reviewer: Nit: Other usages of this phrase have a comma "type-safe, inline overload".

@ExperimentalSerializationApi
inline fun <reified T> encodeToList(value: T) = encodeToList(serializer(), value)

@Serializable
data class Project(val name: String, val owner: User, val votes: Int)

@Serializable
data class User(val name: String)

@OptIn(ExperimentalSerializationApi::class)
fun main() {
    val data = Project("kotlinx.serialization", User("kotlin"), 9000)
    println(encodeToList(data))
    // [kotlinx.serialization, kotlin, 9000]
}
```
{kotlin-runnable="true"}

The output shows that the encoder collects all serialized values into a flat list in serialization order.

> This can be useful when you need to process those values uniformly, for example to compute a hash or digest.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This can be useful when you need to process those values uniformly, for example to compute a hash or a digest.
```

Author: Since these are coordinated nouns that share specificity, I don't think we need the second article. (ofc, it doesn't hurt to add it either; both are grammatically correct) Is there a reason to add it? 🤔

Reviewer: Nope, just sounded off to me :)

### Create a basic decoder

To build a custom `Decoder` in Kotlin serialization, you can extend the `AbstractDecoder` class.
This allows you to control how each value is deserialized during the decoding process.

To create a basic decoder:

1. Create a class that extends `AbstractDecoder` to define custom deserialization logic:

    ```kotlin
    @ExperimentalSerializationApi
    class ListDecoder(val list: ArrayDeque<Any>) : AbstractDecoder() {
        private var elementIndex = 0
    
        override val serializersModule: SerializersModule = EmptySerializersModule()
    }
    ```

2. Override the [`decodeValue()`](https://kotlinlang.org/api/kotlinx.serialization/kotlinx-serialization-core/kotlinx.serialization.encoding/-abstract-decoder/decode-value.html) function to define how the decoder deserializes values:

    ```kotlin

>         override fun decodeValue(): Any = list.removeFirst()

Reviewer: Same as above, to clarify that `decodeValue()` is a member of `ListDecoder`.

   >
   {style="tip"}

4. Override the [`beginStructure()`](https://kotlinlang.org/api/kotlinx.serialization/kotlinx-serialization-core/kotlinx.serialization.encoding/-abstract-decoder/begin-structure.html) function to create a new decoder for each nested structure, so each recursively decoded structure keeps its own `elementIndex` state:

    ```kotlin
        override fun beginStructure(descriptor: SerialDescriptor): CompositeDecoder =
            ListDecoder(list)
    ```

5. Create a function that uses the decoder to deserialize a value:

    ```kotlin
    @ExperimentalSerializationApi
    fun <T> decodeFromList(list: List<Any>, deserializer: DeserializationStrategy<T>): T {
        val decoder = ListDecoder(ArrayDeque(list))
        return decoder.decodeSerializableValue(deserializer)
    }
    ```

6. Add an inline overload to make deserialization easier to call:

    ```kotlin
    @ExperimentalSerializationApi
    inline fun <reified T> decodeFromList(list: List<Any>): T = decodeFromList(list, serializer())
    ```

Here's a complete example that decodes a list of primitive values back into an object:

```kotlin

> // Imports declarations from the serialization library

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

    println(obj)
    // Project(name=kotlinx.serialization, owner=User(name=kotlin), votes=9000)
}
//sampleEnd
```
{kotlin-runnable="true"}

The output shows that the decoder reads the list back in serialization order and reconstructs the original object.

The `decodeElementIndex()` function reports which property comes next, and the `beginStructure()` function creates a new decoder state for nested objects.

### Optimize with sequential decoding

If your format always stores values in declaration order and doesn't support [skipping optional elements](serialization-create-and-use-serializers.md#encode-default-values-in-custom-serializers), you can optimize decoding with the [`decodeSequentially()`](https://kotlinlang.org/api/kotlinx.serialization/kotlinx-serialization-core/kotlinx.serialization.encoding/-composite-decoder/decode-sequentially.html) function.

When this function returns `true`, serializers that support sequential decoding can read values in order without repeatedly requesting the next element index.
This can improve performance when deserializing data stored in sequential formats. Serializers generated by the `kotlinx.serialization` plugin use this optimization.

> > Returning `true` from the `decodeSequentially()` function doesn't guarantee that serializers using your decoder will use sequential decoding.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> Returning `true` from the `decodeSequentially()` function doesn't guarantee that serializers using your decoder use sequential decoding.
```

> Therefore, make sure your decoder also supports regular decoding with the `decodeElementIndex()` function.
>

> {style="note"}

Reviewer: Two admonitions in a row don't look good, and I'd say this part simply continues the train of thought: "can read" does not mean "will read", keep that in mind and support all cases. So I'd make it a simple paragraph.

>
{style="tip"}

Here's how to apply this optimization to the custom `ListDecoder`:

```kotlin
// Imports declarations from the serialization library
import kotlinx.serialization.*
import kotlinx.serialization.descriptors.*
import kotlinx.serialization.encoding.*
import kotlinx.serialization.modules.*

@ExperimentalSerializationApi
class ListEncoder : AbstractEncoder() {
    val list = mutableListOf<Any>()

    override val serializersModule: SerializersModule = EmptySerializersModule()

    override fun encodeValue(value: Any) {
        list.add(value)
    }
}

@ExperimentalSerializationApi
fun <T> encodeToList(serializer: SerializationStrategy<T>, value: T): List<Any> {
    val encoder = ListEncoder()
    encoder.encodeSerializableValue(serializer, value)
    return encoder.list
}

@ExperimentalSerializationApi
inline fun <reified T> encodeToList(value: T) = encodeToList(serializer(), value)

//sampleStart
@ExperimentalSerializationApi
class ListDecoder(val list: ArrayDeque<Any>) : AbstractDecoder() {
    private var elementIndex = 0

    override val serializersModule: SerializersModule = EmptySerializersModule()

    override fun decodeValue(): Any = list.removeFirst()

>     override fun decodeElementIndex(descriptor: SerialDescriptor): Int {

Reviewer: And here we can reinforce the point from above, commenting on the fact that we still implement `decodeElementIndex()` even though it's a literal textbook example of using sequential decoding.

Author: good idea 👍 added a comment!

    // Adds support for regular decoding when a serializer doesn't use sequential decoding

### Add collection support

A basic custom format can encode collection elements one by one, but decoding also needs to know how many elements belong to the collection.

To support collections in a custom format, encode the collection size along with its elements so the decoder knows where the collection ends:

1. Implement the [`beginCollection()`](https://kotlinlang.org/api/kotlinx.serialization/kotlinx-serialization-core/kotlinx.serialization.encoding/-encoder/begin-collection.html) function in the encoder to handle the collection size.
2. Return the encoder instance from the `beginCollection()` function if the encoder doesn't need extra collection-specific state.
3. Implement the [`decodeCollectionSize()`](https://kotlinlang.org/api/kotlinx.serialization/kotlinx-serialization-core/kotlinx.serialization.encoding/-composite-decoder/decode-collection-size.html) function in the decoder to decode and store the collection size during deserialization.
4. Return `true` from the `decodeSequentially()` function if the format stores collection size in advance and values are read in order.

Here's a complete example that adds collection support to `ListEncoder`:

```kotlin

> // Imports declarations from the serialization library

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

### Add null support

To support null values in a custom format, you need a way to distinguish `null` from a regular value.

This typically involves adding a "null indicator" before each nullable value that distinguishes between `null` values and actual data.

To add support for null values in a custom format:

1. Override [`encodeNull()`](https://kotlinlang.org/api/kotlinx.serialization/kotlinx-serialization-core/kotlinx.serialization.encoding/-abstract-encoder/encode-null.html) in the encoder to specify how `null` values are marked.
2. Override [`encodeNotNullMark()`](https://kotlinlang.org/api/kotlinx.serialization/kotlinx-serialization-core/kotlinx.serialization.encoding/-encoder/encode-not-null-mark.html) in the encoder to mark non-null values.
3. Override [`decodeNotNullMark()`](https://kotlinlang.org/api/kotlinx.serialization/kotlinx-serialization-core/kotlinx.serialization.encoding/-decoder/decode-not-null-mark.html) in the decoder to check that marker before decoding the value.

Here's an example that adds `null` support to the `ListEncoder` and `ListDecoder` implementations:

```kotlin

> // Imports declarations from the serialization library

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

   return encoder.list
}

@ExperimentalSerializationApi
inline fun <reified T> encodeToList(value: T) = encodeToList(serializer(), value)

@ExperimentalSerializationApi
fun <T> decodeFromList(list: List<Any>, deserializer: DeserializationStrategy<T>): T {
   val decoder = ListDecoder(ArrayDeque(list))
   return decoder.decodeSerializableValue(deserializer)
}

@ExperimentalSerializationApi
inline fun <reified T> decodeFromList(list: List<Any>): T = decodeFromList(list, serializer())

@Serializable
data class Project(val name: String, val owner: User?, val votes: Int?)

@Serializable
data class User(val name: String)

//sampleStart
@ExperimentalSerializationApi
class ListEncoder : AbstractEncoder() {
    val list = mutableListOf<Any>()

    override val serializersModule: SerializersModule = EmptySerializersModule()

    override fun encodeValue(value: Any) {
        list.add(value)
    }

    override fun beginCollection(descriptor: SerialDescriptor, collectionSize: Int): CompositeEncoder {
        encodeInt(collectionSize)
        return this
    }

    // Represents null values as NULL
    override fun encodeNull() = encodeValue("NULL")

>     // Represents non-null values with "!!"

Reviewer: Should it be "_marks_ non-null values"? I'm getting a bit lost in the difference between non-null values and actual data because in the intro we only talk about nulls, data, and marks, and here it becomes more complicated suddenly.

        return elementIndex++
    }

    override fun beginStructure(descriptor: SerialDescriptor): CompositeDecoder =
        ListDecoder(list, descriptor.elementsCount)

    override fun decodeSequentially(): Boolean = true

    override fun decodeCollectionSize(descriptor: SerialDescriptor): Int =
        decodeInt().also { elementsCount = it }

    // Checks if the next value is "NULL" to determine whether the next nullable value is null
    override fun decodeNotNullMark(): Boolean = decodeString() != "NULL"
}

@OptIn(ExperimentalSerializationApi::class)
fun main() {
    val data = Project("kotlinx.serialization", User("kotlin"), null)
    val list = encodeToList(data)
    println(list)
    // [kotlinx.serialization, !!, kotlin, NULL]

    val obj = decodeFromList<Project>(list)
    println(obj)
    // Project(name=kotlinx.serialization, owner=User(name=kotlin), votes=null)
}
//sampleEnd
```
{kotlin-runnable="true"}

In this example, the encoder writes `!!` before a non-null value and writes `NULL` for a `null` value.
The decoder checks these markers to decide whether to decode a value or return `null`.

### Create a compact binary format

> Binary formats are often used for their compact representation of data, making them ideal for scenarios where minimizing storage size or transmission bandwidth is important.

Reviewer: "minimizing transmission bandwidth" is probably not what you meant here? Minimizing network traffic or request size?

Author: hmm 🤔 I think it would be more correct to say: 

Binary formats are often used for their compact representation of data, making them ideal for scenarios where minimizing the amount of data stored or transmitted is important.

Custom binary formats allow you to control how data is serialized and deserialized at a low level,

> providing flexibility to optimize performance and compatibility with other systems.

Reviewer: This line makes my eyes glaze over 😅 
Can we make it a separate sentence with simpler language? "This allows you to optimize..."?

You can create a custom binary format with Kotlin serialization by implementing the
[`java.io.DataOutput`](https://docs.oracle.com/javase/8/docs/api/java/io/DataOutput.html) and the [`java.io.DataInput`](https://docs.oracle.com/javase/8/docs/api/java/io/DataInput.html) interfaces.

> Let's look at an example of how to turn the `ListEncoder` and `ListDecoder` implementations into a compact binary format using `DataOutput` and `DataInput`:

Reviewer: I would link to examples above so that people who jump straight into binary formats had the necessary context.

Author: good idea — linked 💯

> Let's look at an example of how to turn the `ListEncoder` and `ListDecoder` implementations into a compact binary format using `DataOutput` and `DataInput`:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Here's an example of how to turn the `ListEncoder` and `ListDecoder` implementations into a compact binary format using `DataOutput` and `DataInput`:
```

        override fun encodeString(value: String) = output.writeUTF(value)
        override fun encodeEnum(enumDescriptor: SerialDescriptor, index: Int) = output.writeInt(index)
    ```

2. Implement the decode functions for each primitive type, such as `decodeInt()` or `decodeString()`.
   This lets the decoder decode values directly from the `DataInput` stream and reconstruct the original data structure:

    ```kotlin
        override fun decodeBoolean(): Boolean = input.readByte().toInt() != 0
        override fun decodeByte(): Byte = input.readByte()
        override fun decodeShort(): Short = input.readShort()
        override fun decodeInt(): Int = input.readInt()
        override fun decodeLong(): Long = input.readLong()
        override fun decodeFloat(): Float = input.readFloat()
        override fun decodeDouble(): Double = input.readDouble()
        override fun decodeChar(): Char = input.readChar()
        override fun decodeString(): String = input.readUTF()
        override fun decodeEnum(enumDescriptor: SerialDescriptor): Int = input.readInt()
    ```

3. Use these classes to serialize and deserialize Kotlin objects in a binary format:

    ```kotlin

>     // Imports declarations from the serialization library

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

    }
    //sampleStart
    @Serializable
    data class Project(val name: String, val language: String)

    @OptIn(ExperimentalSerializationApi::class)
    fun main() {
        val data = Project("kotlinx.serialization", "Kotlin")
        // Encodes the object to the custom binary format
        val output = ByteArrayOutputStream()
        encodeTo(DataOutputStream(output), data)

        val bytes = output.toByteArray()
        println(bytes.toAsciiHexString())
        // {00}{15}kotlinx.serialization{00}{06}Kotlin

        // Decodes the object from the custom binary format
        val input = ByteArrayInputStream(bytes)
        val obj = decodeFrom<Project>(DataInputStream(input))
        println(obj)
        // Project(name=kotlinx.serialization, language=Kotlin)
    }
    //sampleEnd
    ```
    {kotlin-runnable="true"}

In this example, the custom format encodes only the serialized values without keys or property names in binary form and decodes them back into a `Project` object.
This makes it easier to adapt the format for cases where you need a compact representation and precise control over the binary encoding.

### Add support for format-specific types

> A custom format can provide support for types that don't map directly to the standard primitive encoding functions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A custom format can support types that don't map directly to the standard primitive encoding functions.
```

Reviewer 2: There are three ways to support custom types:
- Detection by the format (e.g. `ByteArray`)
- Detection by the serializer (e.g. `JsonElement`):
- Special purpose interfaces extending (`De`)`SerializationStrategy`

This distinction is probably worthwhile to mention. The format detection is required for format-customization for pre-existing serializers or commonly used types. It should be used where the canonical serialization for the type would differ from the "default" behaviour (without this special case)

The serializer detection allows for data types to have custom special case support for specific formats by detecting the encoder. This does not require changes to the format, and can be used by client code.

The final approach is somewhat of a blend between the two before. It allows a serializer to implement an extended interface that then can be used by the format to invoke this custom serialization behaviour (I have this in `XmlSerializationStrategy` (etc.).) The advantage is that it allows the format to know the "special handling" is happening (and in case of XML provides some mechanisms to make the parsing more robust against incorrect parsing by the serializer). Depending on the interface it allows those interactions that cannot be achieved using custom serializers alone, but without requiring special case support in the format.

-----

Separately from the consideration above, it might also be worthwhile to give some examples here.

> To add this support, override the `encodeSerializableValue()` function in the encoder and the `decodeSerializableValue()` function in the decoder.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To support such types, override the `encodeSerializableValue()` function in the encoder and the `decodeSerializableValue()` function in the decoder.
```

> This lets you [define a custom serialization](create-custom-serializers.md) logic for format-specific types,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This lets you [define custom serialization logic](create-custom-serializers.md) for format-specific types,
```

1. Obtain a serializer for the format-specific type, so the encoder can detect it by descriptor:

    ```kotlin
    private val byteArraySerializer = serializer<ByteArray>()
    ```   

    > You can also use the built-in [`ByteArraySerializer()`](https://kotlinlang.org/api/kotlinx.serialization/kotlinx-serialization-core/kotlinx.serialization.builtins/-byte-array-serializer.html) function for a similar result.
    >
    {style="tip"}

2. Override the `encodeSerializableValue()` function in the encoder to detect `ByteArray` values by descriptor and use a specialized encoding path.
   Then define helper functions to encode the byte array:

   ```kotlin
   override fun <T> encodeSerializableValue(serializer: SerializationStrategy<T>, value: T) {
       if (serializer.descriptor == byteArraySerializer.descriptor)
           encodeByteArray(value as ByteArray)
       else
           super.encodeSerializableValue(serializer, value)
   }

   private fun encodeByteArray(bytes: ByteArray) {
       encodeCompactSize(bytes.size)
       output.write(bytes)

>    }

Reviewer: Could we add a comment about the purpose of this function? They are both "helper", but how exactly.

Author: ofc, good idea. we have it below in the full example, so copying here for clarity makes sense.

4. Serialize and deserialize objects with the embedded `ByteArray` data:

   ```kotlin
   @Serializable
   data class Project(val name: String, val attachment: ByteArray)
   
   @OptIn(ExperimentalSerializationApi::class)
   fun main() {
       val data = Project("kotlinx.serialization", byteArrayOf(0x0A, 0x0B, 0x0C, 0x0D))
       val output = ByteArrayOutputStream()
       encodeTo(DataOutputStream(output), data)
       val bytes = output.toByteArray()
       println(bytes.toAsciiHexString())
       // {00}{15}kotlinx.serialization{04}{0A}{0B}{0C}{0D}

       val input = ByteArrayInputStream(bytes)
       val obj = decodeFrom<Project>(DataInputStream(input))
       println(obj)
       // Project(name=kotlinx.serialization, attachment=[10, 11, 12, 13])
   }
   ```
   {collapsible="true" default-state="expanded" collapsed-title="data class Project(val name: String, val attachment: ByteArray)"}

Here's the complete example that serializes and deserializes a class with a `ByteArray` property using the specialized encoding and decoding path:

```kotlin

> // Imports declarations from the serialization library

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

import kotlinx.serialization.*
import kotlinx.serialization.Serializable
import kotlinx.serialization.descriptors.*
import kotlinx.serialization.modules.*
import kotlinx.serialization.encoding.*
import java.io.*

// Declares the serializer used to detect ByteArray by descriptor
private val byteArraySerializer = serializer<ByteArray>()

@ExperimentalSerializationApi
class DataOutputEncoder(val output: DataOutput) : AbstractEncoder() {
    override val serializersModule: SerializersModule = EmptySerializersModule()

>     // Encodes the primitive types

Reviewer: Nit: The singular here is a little jarring, since the comment usually applies to the next line / declaration. Not sure my suggestion is that much better :)
```suggestion
    // These functions encode the primitive types
```

    override fun encodeDouble(value: Double) = output.writeDouble(value)
    override fun encodeChar(value: Char) = output.writeChar(value.code)
    override fun encodeString(value: String) = output.writeUTF(value)
    override fun encodeEnum(enumDescriptor: SerialDescriptor, index: Int) = output.writeInt(index)

    override fun beginCollection(descriptor: SerialDescriptor, collectionSize: Int): CompositeEncoder {
        encodeInt(collectionSize)
        return this
    }

    override fun encodeNull() = encodeBoolean(false)
    override fun encodeNotNullMark() = encodeBoolean(true)

    // Detects ByteArray by descriptor and uses a specialized encoding path
    override fun <T> encodeSerializableValue(serializer: SerializationStrategy<T>, value: T) {
        if (serializer.descriptor == byteArraySerializer.descriptor)
            encodeByteArray(value as ByteArray)
        else
            super.encodeSerializableValue(serializer, value)
    }

    // Encodes a ByteArray with a compact size representation
    private fun encodeByteArray(bytes: ByteArray) {
        encodeCompactSize(bytes.size)
        output.write(bytes)
    }

>     // Encodes sizes up to 254 in a single byte

Reviewer: Encodes sizes or "integers of sizes"?

Author: it encodes sizes 🤔 so it should be correct; perhaps — `// Encodes size values up to 254 in a single byte` for clarity?

Reviewer: Nah, I just wasn't sure I read that right.

            decodeByteArray() as T
        else
            super.decodeSerializableValue(deserializer, previousValue)

    // Decodes the array size and then the byte array contents
    private fun decodeByteArray(): ByteArray {
        val bytes = ByteArray(decodeCompactSize())
        input.readFully(bytes)
        return bytes
    }

    // Decodes sizes up to 254 from a single byte
    private fun decodeCompactSize(): Int {
        val byte = input.readByte().toInt() and 0xff
        if (byte < 0xff) return byte
        return input.readInt()
    }
}

@ExperimentalSerializationApi
fun <T> decodeFrom(input: DataInput, deserializer: DeserializationStrategy<T>): T {
    val decoder = DataInputDecoder(input)
    return decoder.decodeSerializableValue(deserializer)
}

@ExperimentalSerializationApi
inline fun <reified T> decodeFrom(input: DataInput): T = decodeFrom(input, serializer())

fun ByteArray.toAsciiHexString() = joinToString("") {
    if (it in 32..127) it.toInt().toChar().toString() else
        "{${it.toUByte().toString(16).padStart(2, '0').uppercase()}}"
}

@Serializable
data class Project(val name: String, val attachment: ByteArray)

> @OptIn(ExperimentalSerializationApi::class)

Reviewer: Should this opt in be included in the visible sample? Feels strange to separate an annotation from the function.

Author: good point — added it 👍

}
//sampleEnd
```
{kotlin-runnable="true"}

The output shows that the encoder collects all serialized values into a flat list in serialization order.
This can be useful when you need to process those values uniformly, for example to compute a hash or digest.

### Create a basic decoder

To build a custom `Decoder` in Kotlin serialization, you can extend the `AbstractDecoder` class.
This allows you to control how each value is deserialized during the decoding process.

To create a basic decoder:

1. Create a class that extends `AbstractDecoder` to define custom deserialization logic:

    ```kotlin
    @ExperimentalSerializationApi
    class ListDecoder(val list: ArrayDeque<Any>) : AbstractDecoder() {
        private var elementIndex = 0
    
        override val serializersModule: SerializersModule = EmptySerializersModule()
    }
    ```

2. Override the [`decodeValue()`](https://kotlinlang.org/api/kotlinx.serialization/kotlinx-serialization-core/kotlinx.serialization.encoding/-abstract-decoder/decode-value.html) function to define how the decoder deserializes values:

    ```kotlin
        override fun decodeValue(): Any = list.removeFirst()
    ```

> 3. Override the [`decodeElementIndex()`](https://kotlinlang.org/api/kotlinx.serialization/kotlinx-serialization-core/kotlinx.serialization.encoding/-composite-decoder/decode-element-index.html) function to report which element is decoded next and return `DECODE_DONE` when the structure is complete:

Reviewer 3: " In this primitive format deserialization always happens in order, so simply we keep track of the index in the elementIndex variable." is an extremely important note, as IRL decodeElementIndex implementation is usually more complex than in our example

Author: hmm 🤔 we could add something like this clarify: 

This format deserializes values in serialization order, so you can use a simple `elementIndex` counter to track progress.
More complex formats often need additional logic to find the next decoded element:

Reviewer 2: The usage of the list index does not work with nested structs. It would require some sort of element stack (or `CompositeDecoder` nesting). It also does not support optional values. The example is helpful as absolute minimal, but it should make very clear that this is not really sufficient to be a working format.

Separately `decodeElementIndex()` is defined in `CompositeDecoder` not `Decoder`. The handling of structures really should be discussed. I think that you may almost treat the unified approach as a shortcut that works for some cases.

        if (elementIndex == elementsCount) return CompositeDecoder.DECODE_DONE
        return elementIndex++
    }

    override fun beginStructure(descriptor: SerialDescriptor): CompositeDecoder =
        ListDecoder(list, descriptor.elementsCount)

    override fun decodeSequentially(): Boolean = true

    override fun decodeCollectionSize(descriptor: SerialDescriptor): Int =
        decodeInt().also { elementsCount = it }

    // Checks if the next value is "NULL" to determine whether the next nullable value is null
    override fun decodeNotNullMark(): Boolean = decodeString() != "NULL"
}
//sampleEnd

@ExperimentalSerializationApi
fun <T> decodeFromList(list: List<Any>, deserializer: DeserializationStrategy<T>): T {
    val decoder = ListDecoder(ArrayDeque(list))
    return decoder.decodeSerializableValue(deserializer)
}

@ExperimentalSerializationApi
inline fun <reified T> decodeFromList(list: List<Any>): T = decodeFromList(list, serializer())

@Serializable
data class Project(val name: String, val owner: User?, val votes: Int?)

@Serializable
data class User(val name: String)

@OptIn(ExperimentalSerializationApi::class)

> fun main() {

Reviewer 3: Maybe also include this in the sample so people can see the comments with how actual output looks like?

Author: sounds good — moved it around for the other one as well 👍

These interfaces let you control how values of [primitive types](serialization-serialize-builtin-types.md#basic-types) are encoded and decoded in binary form.

Let's look at an example of how to turn the `ListEncoder` and `ListDecoder` implementations into a compact binary format using `DataOutput` and `DataInput`:

1. Override the encode functions for each primitive type, such as `encodeInt()` for integers or `encodeString()` for strings.
This lets the encoder encode values directly to the `DataOutput` stream:
    
    ```kotlin
    // Imports declarations from the serialization library
    import kotlinx.serialization.*
    import kotlinx.serialization.Serializable
    import kotlinx.serialization.descriptors.*
    import kotlinx.serialization.encoding.*
    import kotlinx.serialization.modules.*
    import java.io.*
    
    @ExperimentalSerializationApi
    class DataOutputEncoder(val output: DataOutput) : AbstractEncoder() {
        override val serializersModule: SerializersModule = EmptySerializersModule()
    
        // Encodes primitive values directly in binary form

>         override fun encodeBoolean(value: Boolean) = output.writeByte(if (value) 1 else 0)

Reviewer 3: Let's just show here primitive functions without including the whole class:

```kotlin
override fun encodeBoolean(value: Boolean) = output.writeByte(if (value) 1 else 0)
    override fun encodeByte(value: Byte) = output.writeByte(value.toInt())
override fun encodeShort(value: Short) = output.writeShort(value.toInt())
override fun encodeInt(value: Int) = output.writeInt(value)
        override fun encodeLong(value: Long) = output.writeLong(value)
        override fun encodeFloat(value: Float) = output.writeFloat(value)
        override fun encodeDouble(value: Double) = output.writeDouble(value)
        override fun encodeChar(value: Char) = output.writeChar(value.code)
        override fun encodeString(value: String) = output.writeUTF(value)
        override fun encodeEnum(enumDescriptor: SerialDescriptor, index: Int) = output.writeInt(index)
```

    
        override fun beginCollection(descriptor: SerialDescriptor, collectionSize: Int): CompositeEncoder {
            encodeInt(collectionSize)
            return this
        }
    
        override fun encodeNull() = encodeBoolean(false)
        override fun encodeNotNullMark() = encodeBoolean(true)
    }
    
    @ExperimentalSerializationApi
    fun <T> encodeTo(output: DataOutput, serializer: SerializationStrategy<T>, value: T) {
        val encoder = DataOutputEncoder(output)
        encoder.encodeSerializableValue(serializer, value)
    }
    
    @ExperimentalSerializationApi
    inline fun <reified T> encodeTo(output: DataOutput, value: T) = encodeTo(output, serializer(), value)
    ```
    {initial-collapse-state="collapsed" collapsible="true"  collapsed-title="override fun encodeByte(value: Byte) = output.writeByte(value.toInt())"}

2. Implement the decode functions for each primitive type, such as `decodeInt()` or `decodeString()`.
This lets the decoder decode values directly from the `DataInput` stream and reconstruct the original data structure:
    
    ```kotlin 
    @ExperimentalSerializationApi

>     class DataInputDecoder(val input: DataInput, var elementsCount: Int = 0) : AbstractDecoder() {

Reviewer 3: same here (and then we probably don't need it to be collapsible)

    
        override fun decodeCollectionSize(descriptor: SerialDescriptor): Int =
            decodeInt().also { elementsCount = it }
    
        override fun decodeNotNullMark(): Boolean = decodeBoolean()
    }
    
    
    @ExperimentalSerializationApi
    fun <T> decodeFrom(input: DataInput, deserializer: DeserializationStrategy<T>): T {
        val decoder = DataInputDecoder(input)
        return decoder.decodeSerializableValue(deserializer)
    }
    
    @ExperimentalSerializationApi
    inline fun <reified T> decodeFrom(input: DataInput): T = decodeFrom(input, serializer())
    
    fun ByteArray.toAsciiHexString() = joinToString("") {
        if (it in 32..127) it.toInt().toChar().toString() else
            "{${it.toUByte().toString(16).padStart(2, '0').uppercase()}}"
    }
    ```
    {initial-collapse-state="collapsed" collapsible="true"  collapsed-title="override fun decodeByte(): Byte = input.readByte()"}

3. Use these classes to serialize and deserialize Kotlin objects in a binary format:

    ```kotlin    
    @Serializable
    data class Project(val name: String, val language: String)
    
    @OptIn(ExperimentalSerializationApi::class)

>     fun main() {

Reviewer 3: Make this sample runnable, include full DataInputDecoder/Encoder before //sampleStart

           if (serializer.descriptor == byteArraySerializer.descriptor)
               encodeByteArray(value as ByteArray)
           else
               super.encodeSerializableValue(serializer, value)
       }
   
       private fun encodeByteArray(bytes: ByteArray) {
           encodeCompactSize(bytes.size)
           output.write(bytes)
       }
   
       private fun encodeCompactSize(value: Int) {
           if (value < 0xff) {
               output.writeByte(value)
           } else {
               output.writeByte(0xff)
               output.writeInt(value)
           }
       }
   }
   ```
   {initial-collapse-state="collapsed" collapsible="true"  collapsed-title="override fun <T> encodeSerializableValue(serializer: SerializationStrategy<T>, value: T) {"}

3. Override the [`decodeSerializableValue()`](https://kotlinlang.org/api/kotlinx.serialization/kotlinx-serialization-core/kotlinx.serialization.encoding/-decoder/decode-serializable-value.html) function in the decoder to detect `ByteArray` values by descriptor and deserialize them with the matching compact size format:

   ```kotlin
       @Suppress("UNCHECKED_CAST")

>        override fun <T> decodeSerializableValue(deserializer: DeserializationStrategy<T>, previousValue: T?): T =

Reviewer 3: Here is better. Still, not convinced blocks should be collapsed by default.

Author: we can make it expanded by default and optionally collapsible 👍

    
        override val serializersModule: SerializersModule = EmptySerializersModule()
    }
    ```

2. Override the [`decodeValue()`](https://kotlinlang.org/api/kotlinx.serialization/kotlinx-serialization-core/kotlinx.serialization.encoding/-abstract-decoder/decode-value.html) function to define how the decoder deserializes values:

    ```kotlin
        override fun decodeValue(): Any = list.removeFirst()
    ```

3. Override the [`decodeElementIndex()`](https://kotlinlang.org/api/kotlinx.serialization/kotlinx-serialization-core/kotlinx.serialization.encoding/-composite-decoder/decode-element-index.html) function to report which element is decoded next and return `DECODE_DONE` when the structure is complete:

    ```kotlin
        override fun decodeElementIndex(descriptor: SerialDescriptor): Int {
            if (elementIndex == descriptor.elementsCount) return CompositeDecoder.DECODE_DONE
            return elementIndex++
        }
    ```
   
   This format deserializes values in serialization order, so you can use a simple `elementIndex` counter to track progress.
   More complex formats often need additional logic to find the next decoded element:

> 

Reviewer 2: You should probably add an override to `shouldEncodeElementDefault` (always returning false) as this format does not support optional elements.

Reviewer 3: AbstractEncoder.shouldEncodeElementDefault always returns true, which forces encoding of everything, so it would work correctly out of the box. I'm not sure we can mention it without bloating the example, as we would also need to add an appropriate skipping mechanism during decoding

Reviewer 2: @sandwwraith I was thinking more about the other way around (it not being encoded, and the skipping being needed - therefore creating either an incorrect or complex example). I checked, the default on the interface is also `true`, so the default works correctly.

@Serializable
data class Project(val name: String, val owner: User, val votes: Int)

@Serializable
data class User(val name: String)

@OptIn(ExperimentalSerializationApi::class)
fun main() {
    val data = Project("kotlinx.serialization",  User("kotlin"), 9000)
    val list = encodeToList(data)
    println(list)
    // [kotlinx.serialization, kotlin, 9000]

    val obj = decodeFromList<Project>(list)
    println(obj)
    // Project(name=kotlinx.serialization, owner=User(name=kotlin), votes=9000)
}
//sampleEnd
```
{kotlin-runnable="true"}

The output shows that the decoder reads the list back in serialization order and reconstructs the original object.

The `decodeElementIndex()` function reports which property comes next, and the `beginStructure()` function creates a new decoder state for nested objects.

### Optimize with sequential decoding

If your format always stores values in declaration order, you can optimize decoding with the [`decodeSequentially()`](https://kotlinlang.org/api/kotlinx.serialization/kotlinx-serialization-core/kotlinx.serialization.encoding/-composite-decoder/decode-sequentially.html) function.

> When this function returns `true`, serializers that support sequential decoding can read values in order without repeatedly requesting the next element index.

Reviewer 3: I think it's also better to add link to https://github.com/Kotlin/kotlinx.serialization/blob/master/docs/serializers.md#sequential-decoding-protocol-experimental, so these sections will be tied together. E.g. `All auto-generated serializers on the JVM support the Sequential decoding protocol and will make use of this optimization`

Reviewer 2: Perhaps it is worth adding a warning that if a format supports this, it should still support both the cases where the next element index is requested. While I am not sure why you would query this and then ignore it, the name of the function implies that this is a stateless query and using this as a state switch would create a fragile format.

Author: We could implement the link and the comment about auto-generated serializers like this: 

When this function returns `true`, serializers that support sequential decoding can read values in order without repeatedly requesting the next element index.
This can improve performance when deserializing data stored in sequential formats. On the JVM, serializers generated by the `kotlinx.serialization` plugin use this optimization.

> To see how a serializer uses the `decodeSequentially()` function during deserialization, see [Optimize deserialization with sequential decoding](serialization-create-and-use-serializers.md#optimize-deserialization-with-sequential-decoding).
> 
{style="tip"}

Regarding the warning about decode 🤔 — would it make sense to include here? with something like:

Even if your decoder supports sequential decoding, make sure it also supports decoding with the `decodeElementIndex()` function.

Reviewer 2: @daniCsorbaJB 

Maybe rephrase
> ...decoding can read values in order...

to something like: "...decoding **will be able to** read values **for this struct** in order..."

Trying still not to put too much detail in the docs that can then confuse on its own this makes it more clear that:
 - Formats can expect serializers to call the function before doing sequential decoding (the contract requires the call)
 - The function being called does not require sequential decoding to actually be used
 - The answer could be different for different structs

Reading it again, the current text with "can read" does in some ways also imply the optionality on the serializer part, but it is somewhat hidden.

If you add the warning explicitly, it should add something like "even if `decodeSequentially` returned `true` for this struct". Another way to phrase it is:
"Note that returning `true` from `decodeSequentially` does not guarantee that a serializer will use sequential decoding"

In this example, the encoder writes `!!` before a non-null value and writes `NULL` for a `null` value.
The decoder checks these markers to decide whether to decode a value or return `null`.

### Create a compact binary format

Binary formats are often used for their compact representation of data, making them ideal for scenarios where minimizing storage size or transmission bandwidth is important.

Custom binary formats allow you to control how data is serialized and deserialized at a low level,
providing flexibility to optimize performance and compatibility with other systems.

You can implement a custom binary format with Kotlin serialization by using the
[`java.io.DataOutput`](https://docs.oracle.com/javase/8/docs/api/java/io/DataOutput.html) and the [`java.io.DataInput`](https://docs.oracle.com/javase/8/docs/api/java/io/DataInput.html) interfaces.
These interfaces let you control how values of [primitive types](serialization-serialize-builtin-types.md#basic-types) are encoded and decoded in binary form.

Let's look at an example of how to turn the `ListEncoder` and `ListDecoder` implementations into a compact binary format using `DataOutput` and `DataInput`:

> 1. Override the encode functions for each primitive type, such as `encodeInt()` for integers or `encodeString()` for strings.

Reviewer 3: I think it also important to mention boxing (https://kotlinlang.org/docs/numbers.html#boxing-and-caching-numbers-on-the-jvm) here. See my previous comment for example.

[//]: # (title: Custom serialization formats)
<primary-label ref="experimental-general"/>

[//]: # (description: Learn how to create custom formats for Kotlin serialization, including encoders, decoders, sequential decoding, and support for format-specific types.)

JSON is currently the only stable format in Kotlin serialization.
Kotlin serialization also provides experimental support for the [CBOR](serialization-cbor.md) and [ProtoBuf](serialization-protobuf.md) binary formats, as well as the [`Properties`](serialization-properties-format.md) format for representing classes as flat maps with `String` keys.

These experimental format implementations are production-quality, but future releases may introduce changes to their default serialization behavior.
They may also have format-specific limitations or restrictions on how they represent Kotlin data.

> If none of these formats fit your use case, you can [create a custom format](#create-custom-formats) to control how values and structures are encoded and decoded.

Reviewer: Now the link seems a bit superfluous :)

### Create a basic encoder

> To build a custom `Encoder`, you can extend the `AbstractEncoder` class.

Reviewer: This mixed code and language a bit, I'd keep the reference template the same within a sentence: "To build a custom encoder, you can extend the `AbstractEncoder` class."

### Optimize with sequential decoding

> If your format always stores values in declaration order and doesn't support skipping optional elements, you can optimize decoding with the [`decodeSequentially()`](https://kotlinlang.org/api/kotlinx.serialization/kotlinx-serialization-core/kotlinx.serialization.encoding/-composite-decoder/decode-sequentially.html) function.

Reviewer 3: Maybe we can add a link here to https://kotlinlang.org/api/kotlinx.serialization/kotlinx-serialization-core/kotlinx.serialization.encoding/-composite-encoder/should-encode-element-default.html, although it may be quite confusing since it is method from an encoder and we're talking about the decoding

Author: 🤔 good point though... alternatively, we could even link to https://kotlinlang.org/docs/serialization-create-and-use-serializers.html#encode-default-values-in-custom-serializers but that might be confusing as well 🤔 
Rereading it I feel like we could skip it - we can always put it in if we get feedback that it's confusing without 🤔

Reviewer 2: From a decoding perspective, it is safe to use `decodeSequentially` as long as there are no skipped elements in the actual input stream (all optional ones have a value, or there are no optional values in the struct). Especially the latter is fairly simple to check (caching may help though), the former may be too expensive (for a general case - if there is a size and a finite maximum encoding size and they are equal you know there are no omitted elements without having to check individual elements)

Reviewer 3: Yes, I think https://kotlinlang.org/docs/serialization-create-and-use-serializers.html#encode-default-values-in-custom-serializers is better.

Reviewer 3: > it is safe to use decodeSequentially as long as there are no skipped elements in the actual input stream 

But you usually do not know that because items are processed one-by-one. Only maybe if your format has some kind of presence bitmask before every message.

Reviewer 2: > But you usually do not know that because items are processed one-by-one. Only maybe if your format has some kind of presence bitmask before every message.

Indeed, but from a format author perspective this allows knowing when it is able to return `true`. But I give you that for most formats this is hard to determine (unless there are no optional elements in the struct).

    // Represents null values as NULL
    override fun encodeNull() = encodeValue("NULL")

>     // Marks the value as non-null with "!!"

Reviewer: "**a** value"?

## Create custom formats

To create a custom format in Kotlin serialization,
implement the [`Encoder`](https://kotlinlang.org/api/kotlinx.serialization/kotlinx-serialization-core/kotlinx.serialization.encoding/-encoder/) and [`Decoder`](https://kotlinlang.org/api/kotlinx.serialization/kotlinx-serialization-core/kotlinx.serialization.encoding/-decoder/) interfaces.

Serializers use these implementations to encode and decode values.
For structured values, such as classes and collections, serializers call the [`beginStructure()`](https://kotlinlang.org/api/kotlinx.serialization/kotlinx-serialization-core/kotlinx.serialization.encoding/-encoder/begin-structure.html) function.
This function returns a [`CompositeEncoder`](https://kotlinlang.org/api/kotlinx.serialization/kotlinx-serialization-core/kotlinx.serialization.encoding/-composite-encoder/) or [`CompositeDecoder`](https://kotlinlang.org/api/kotlinx.serialization/kotlinx-serialization-core/kotlinx.serialization.encoding/-composite-decoder/) interface with functions that encode or decode each property or element.

> The `Encoder` and `Decoder` interfaces are extensive, but you can use the [`AbstractEncoder`](https://kotlinlang.org/api/kotlinx.serialization/kotlinx-serialization-core/kotlinx.serialization.encoding/-abstract-encoder/) and [`AbstractDecoder`](https://kotlinlang.org/api/kotlinx.serialization/kotlinx-serialization-core/kotlinx.serialization.encoding/-abstract-decoder/) classes to simplify the process of creating custom encoder and decoder implementations.

Reviewer 3: Now you need to explain that `AbstractEncoder/Decoder` implement both regular Encoders and Composite ones

Author: > These classes implement the `Encoder`, `Decoder`, `CompositeEncoder`, and `CompositeDecoder` interfaces, so you can use the same class to handle primitive values and structured values in simple formats.

agreed, good point; 💯  we could add something like this 🤔 not sure about the "simple formats" part - do you think there is a better way to differentiate here? 🤔

Reviewer 3: it's fine

```
{kotlin-runnable="true"}

### Define a format-specific `@Serializable` annotation

You can use the [`@MetaSerializable`](https://kotlinlang.org/api/kotlinx.serialization/kotlinx-serialization-core/kotlinx.serialization/-meta-serializable/) annotation to define a format-specific `@Serializable` annotation.
Add the format-specific annotation to a class instead of `@Serializable` to make the class serializable and include the annotation data in the generated serial descriptor.

Here's an example that defines a `@BinarySerializable` annotation:

```kotlin
import kotlinx.serialization.ExperimentalSerializationApi
import kotlinx.serialization.MetaSerializable

//sampleStart
@OptIn(ExperimentalSerializationApi::class)
// Defines a format-specific annotation that makes annotated classes serializable
@MetaSerializable
@Target(AnnotationTarget.CLASS)
annotation class BinarySerializable(val typeId: Int)

@BinarySerializable(typeId = 1)
data class Project(val name: String, val language: String)

@OptIn(ExperimentalSerializationApi::class)
fun main() {

>     val descriptor = Project.serializer().descriptor

Reviewer 3: Let's also add a comment `// Serializer is generated as if Project had a regular @Serializable annotation` or something like that

Author: good idea - we could add something like:

> // The serialization plugin generates a serializer for Project
> // in the same way as for a class annotated with `@Serializable`

If your format always stores values in declaration order, you can optimize decoding with the [`decodeSequentially()`](https://kotlinlang.org/api/kotlinx.serialization/kotlinx-serialization-core/kotlinx.serialization.encoding/-composite-decoder/decode-sequentially.html) function.

When this function returns `true`, serializers that support sequential decoding can read values in order without repeatedly requesting the next element index.
This can improve performance when deserializing data stored in sequential formats. On the JVM, serializers generated by the `kotlinx.serialization` plugin use this optimization.

> 

Reviewer 3: Let's just add "Note that returning true from decodeSequentially does not guarantee that a serializer will use sequential decoding", I think it will be enough.

Author: hmm 🤔 that's a really good approach, but what do you think about adding this part as well? 🤔 or is this not necessary?

> Returning `true` from the `decodeSequentially()` function doesn't guarantee that serializers using your decoder will use sequential decoding. Therefore, make sure your decoder also supports regular decoding with the `decodeElementIndex()` function.

Reviewer 3: yup, sounds great
